---
title: "Managing Shared Mobility Systems with Electric Vehicles Under Correlated Demand Uncertainties"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-DroV2g
excerpt: 'This paper is about the management of electric vehicles in a shared mobility system.'
date: 2025-2-1
venue: 'Manufacturing & Service Operations Management'
publication_status: "Reject and resubmit in"
slidesurl: 'https://christianbin.github.io/bintian.github.io/files/slides2.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://christianbin.github.io/bintian.github.io/files/dro_v2g.pdf'
citation: 'Ziliang Jin, Bin Tian, Kai Pan, Yun Fong Lim. (2025). Managing Shared Mobility Systems with Electric Vehicles Under Correlated Demand Uncertainties.'
order: 2
---

ABSTRACT: Using electric vehicles (EVs) with vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology in a shared mobility system promotes sustainability but limits vehicle accessibility. This highlights the importance of optimizing the initial EV allocation, which should also consider subsequent operational decisions. The problem is further complicated by correlated uncertainties in trip demands across service regions and time periods without perfect knowledge of these correlations. We propose a two-stage distributionally robust optimization (DRO) model considering ambiguously correlated trip-demand uncertainties. In the first stage, an operator decides the initial vehicle allocation. In the second stage, the operator determines various operational decisions to meet demands over a time horizon. The objective is to minimize the expected cost under a worst-case joint distribution within an ambiguity set based on moment information of the correlated uncertainties. We show a monotonic relationship between the optimal objective value and the trip-demand covariance matrix. We further prioritize trip-demand pairs based on their covariance value or shadow price, enabling us to focus on a subset of demand pairs, which is especially appealing given the operator’s limited resources. To improve computational efficiency, we propose tight approximations of the DRO model based on principal component analysis and develop a hybrid algorithm using a temporal decomposition technique. Numerical results based on real data confirm our approach's efficiency. It is crucial to properly incorporate correlation information, which can attain up to 4.66\% total cost reduction. Furthermore, EVs mostly charge during the early hours when electricity prices and trip demands are low and discharge when prices are high. The peaks of relocation deviate from the peaks of charging of EVs. Faster charging reduces the EV allocation and total cost. We observe more frequent charging of EVs under a time-based pricing scheme for charging compared to an amount-based pricing scheme.
